---
title: 2024's Devlog
tags: journal, programming, culture
---

[Enter 2025](/now).

```
Closing thoughts
```

{{image (src="/polish_satellites_2024.jpg" small=true title="Polish Satellites. Infographic by the Polish Space Agency (POLSA).")}}

1. Polish Space Agency ([POLSA](https://polsa.gov.pl/en/)) has recently posted an
   infographic listing all Polish-built satellites. It turns out that I have
   worked on over half of them!
2. I saw some amazing artists this year. Snarky Puppy, Jacob Collier,
   Skalpel, TR/ST. At this point I can see Vulfpeck and Louis Cole and stop
   going to concerts altogether :)
3. Diversification of my interests, getting more into sports, electronics,
   mechanics, is already paying off!
4. I'll be starting the new year with a new position at my workplace. Writing
   and soft skills are creeping more and more into my job, slowly taking
   programming away.

```
2X.12
```

>Listening:
>
>- Jacob Collier - Djesse Vol.2
>
>Watching:
>
>- Crimes Of The Future (2022)


```
1X.12
```

{{image (src="/skalpel.jpg" small=false title="Skalpel. NFM Wrocław.")}}

>Listening:
>
>- Skalpel
>- PJ Morton - Gumbo Unplugges


```
0X.12
```

>Watching:
>
>- Whiplash (2014)
>- The NeverEnding Story (1984)


```
2X.11
```

Cathing some air around Marseille, France.

After a couple days spent away from work, my thoughts started to circulate
around technologies similar to Phoenix LiveView. Single source of truth on the
server is nothing new, but an easy-to-use abstraction for soft real-time
synchronisation of that state between browser-based clients could be useful in
my niche. Especially when it minimizes the amount of client-side javascript to
be written :)

{{image (src="/marseille.jpg" small=false title="Marseille, Friche la Belle de Mai.")}}

{{image (src="/marseilleveyre.jpg" small=false title="View from Marseilleveyre.")}}

>Reading:
>
>- [Growing Music: musical interpretations of L-Systems](https://ccrma.stanford.edu/~elisse/256A/final/growing%20music%20-%20musical%20interpretations%20of%20l-systems.pdf)
>
>Listening:
>
>- Moderat - MORE D4TA
>- Metronomy - Nice Town
>
>Watching:
>
>- Oldboy (2003)


```
1X.11
```

And there it was. The audience choir (and drum machine). The unexpected Happy
Birthday (in Polish) and equally unexpected FaceTime call that followed it.
Finally, the Polish anthem. Easily the best concert I've ever attented, the
man's a genius. 

{{image (src="/collier_live.jpg" small=false title="Jacob Collier, Łódź.")}}

>Watching:
>
>- The Wild Robot (2024)
>- Castle in the Sky (1986)
>
>Listening:
>
>- Nabihah Iqbal - DREAMER

```
0X.11
```

>Watching:
>
>- The Art of Self-Defense (2019)
>
>Listening:
>
>- Louis Cole - nothing

```
2X.10
```

Learning more about CAD software, designing small parts around a custom
synthesizer which I'd like to build. The sheer amount of work compared to what
I usually have to do for pure-software prototypes is astounding. Gained a ton
of respect to all mechanical engineers this month :)

>Listening:
>
>- Skalpel - Big Band Live
>- TR/ST - Joyland
>
>Watching (now proud of this, still had fun):
>
>- Scary Movie 1
>- Scary Movie 2
>- Scary Movie 3

```
1X.10
```

A friend of mine has recently offered me an amazing birthday gift - we made a
custom stand for my Octatrack, I learned a bit about CADs
([OnShape](https://www.onshape.com/en/)), 3D printing and woodworking. It
turned out really nice!

{{image (src="/octatrack_custom_stand.jpg" small=false title="The result.")}}

{{image (src="/octatrack_stand_side.jpg" small=true title="A single side of the stand.")}}

>Reading:
>
>- Fyodor Dostoevsky - Crime and Punishment
>
>Listening:
>
>- Jacob Collier - Wild Wild Sea


```
0X.10
```

{{image (src="/trst.jpg" small=true title="TR/ST. Progresja Club Warsaw")}}

>Listening:
>
>- TR/ST

```
3X.09
```

>Listening:
>
>- Sungazer -  Against the Fall of Night


```
2X.09
```

>Watching:
>
>- Vivarium (2019)
>- Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy (2011)
>
>Listening:
>
>- KARAŚ/ROGUCKI - Ostatni bastion romantyzmu


```
0X.09
```

>Watching:
>
>- Dark City (1998)
>
>Listening:
>
>- Sampha, Little Simz - Satellite Business 2.0
>- Magdalena Bay - Imaginal Disk
>- Genesis Owusu - STRUGGLER


```
3X.08
```

>Watching:
>
>- Alien: Romulus
>- The Accountant (2016)
>
>Listening:
>
>- Duran Duran - Invisible
>- Sungazer - Against The Fall Of Night


```
2X.08
```

>Watching:
>
>- Furiosa: A Mad Max Saga
>
>Reading:
>
>- Isaac Asimov - Foundation


```
1X.08
```

{{image (src="/eeye_deploy_confirmed.jpg" small=false title="A moment long awaited")}}

*"EagleEye, deploy confirmed"* - words from the SpaceX launch stream, which
sparked a wave of joy in the mission control team in Creotech. Successful
launch, followed by a series of equally successful communication sessions, the
satellite talking with us right from the first communication session… It was a
long night. Glad to report that all mission control systems worked at the first
try, without any unexpected interruptions or downtime. We've already learned
lots from that first launch and operations and with the team we currently have,
I have nothing but good hopes for the future.

>Listening:
>
>- J Dilla - Donuts
>- Sungazer - A Song With No Words
>
>Watching:
>
>- Mars Express (2024)
>- Mad Max: Fury Road (2015)


```
0X.08
```

For the last few weeks, my thoughts have been circling around the topic of
[data sonification](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sonification). In my daily
job, I am often watching over multiple streams of logs and metrics. Processing
all this information just by eyes sounds like a waste of resources. We've built
data visualisation tools so that we can utilize our visual cortex for "free"
data pre-processing. Why not use other senses? 

Thinking about a rich data sonification system. Brain dump:

- For raw textual logs, flow rate as a sub-bass signal. More logs, higher
  frequency or a filter opening up
- Alternative for the bass, an ambient sample, something from Brian Eno's
  *Music for Installations*, rising in volume with the logs flow rate
- A log filtering engine, as simple as mapping "`regex → sound`". All matches are
  fed into a sound generator as MIDI-like events, with some debouncing applied
- Automatic determination of a "nominal" flow rate of all logs or just filtered events.
  Second-order derivative and some inertia? Or maybe just a simple moving average?

>Watching:
>
>- Mad Max 3 (1985)
>
>Listening:
>
>- The Chemical Brothers - Skipping Like A Stone
>- Sungazer - Cytherean


```
3X.07
```

>Watching:
>
>- Mad Max (1979)
>- Mad Max 2 (1981)


```
2X.07
```

Started contributing some of my CPU power to [Science
United](https://scienceunited.org/) via [BOINC](https://boinc.berkeley.edu/).

>Reading:
>
>- Tim Marshal - Prisoners of Geography
>
>Watching:
>
>- Ryuichi Sakamoto - Opus
>-  Eryn O'Neil - [Congrats! You're the tech lead - now what?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FcyD85z3JSI)
>
>Listening:
>
>- Flying Lotus - Zodiac Shit
>- Son Lux - Clair de Lune (Pied au Piano)

---

>Everybody likes to write reusable code and nobody
>wants to reuse anybody else's code
>
>~ Eryn O'Neil

```
1X.07
```

Recent [SpaceX issues with their second
stage](https://www.spacex.com/launches/mission/?missionId=sl-9-3) caused launch
delays, which gave me some much-needed free time to spend more time with the
[Octatrack](/making-music-linux). After listening to too much of Jacob Collier, I'm playing around
with with 3/4 and 5/4 rhythms, a simple way to make the compositions stand out.

{{image (src="/octatrack_reflection.jpg" small=true title="Spending evenings with this machine and my [piano](/piano).")}}

---

{{image (src="/at_spacex.jpg" small=false title="Our satellite integration crew. Glad to hold the unofficial title of the `Youngest-Polish-Programmer-Who-Has-Entered-The-Spacex-Integration-Facility-So-Far`.")}}


```
0X.07
```

>Reading
>
>- Patrick Lencioni - The Ideal Team Player
>
>Listening:
>
>- Anomalie - Lune
>- Swing Out Sister - When the Laughter Is Over


```
3X.06
```

{{image (src="/map_now_has_colors.png" noshadow=true small=false title="Dead-simple gradient-based coloring of posts on the [map](/map).")}}

Started coloring the nodes on the [map](/map) based on how related they are to:

- Art - more red
- Computers - more green
- Music more blue (da ba dee)

Having fun learning about gradients, as most out-of-the-box
visualisation/graphics tools only support linear two-color gradients. Seeing
stuff like [CIELAB](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CIELAB_color_space) is
currently blowing my mind away, hoping to understand it better soon.

---

I've set up [zoxide](https://github.com/ajeetdsouza/zoxide) a couple months ago
and forgot about it completely during holidays. Accidentally fast-jumping to
the correct directory (from an invalid base dir) reminded me that I have it
installed. Recommended tool for sure, improves navigation speed significantly.


```
2X.06
```

{{image (src="/thailand_temple_trees.jpg" small=false title="Exploring Thailand/Bangkok on holidays. I'm sensitive to the heat, but the views are worth it!")}}

Got back to
[libretakt](https://github.com/wint3rmute/libretakt), instead
of rapidly prototyping the UI, I first modelled the
application state as nested fat enums and structs. After the
initial modeling phase, UI implementation felt like a breeze.
Thank you, [@NoBoilerplate](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kdpfhj3VM04)!

>Listening:
>
>- Jacob Collier - Flow Freely
>
>Watching:
>
>- The Boys (Season 1)
>- [Patrick Lencioni - Are you an ideal team player?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PRh80RyT74I)


```
1X.06
```

Visiting places I never thought I'd see.

{{image (src="/jpl.jpg" small=false title="")}}
{{image (src="/vandenberg.jpg" small=false title="")}}


>Listening:
>
>- Jacob Collier - Djesse Vol. 1
>- Aphex Twin - Flim
>
>Reading:
>
>- Liu Cixin - Death's End
>
>Watching:
>
>- [LOGIC SESSION BREAKDOWN: "With The Love In My Heart"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6H-cAzfB2qo)
>- Severance (2022)


```
0X.06
```

>Listening:
>
>- Jacob Collier - Here Comes The Sun (feat. dodie)
>
>Watching:
>
>- Sunshine (2007)
>- The Invisible Man (2020)
>- Invasion of the Body Snatchers (1978)

```
2X.05
```

Migrated my homelab containers (or rather what's left from them, as I'm running
almost everything under NixOS' Systemd services) to
[Podman](https://podman.io/).

Migrated my [LibReddit instance](https://libreddit.baczek.me/) to
[Redlib](https://github.com/redlib-org/redlib), as [LibReddit is being
discontinued](https://github.com/libreddit/libreddit/issues/840).

>Listening:
>
>- Sade - Smooth Operator


```
1X.05
```

After a few weeks of equally satisfying and exhaustive work, earthly days of
the EagleEye satellite have nearly passed. It is now ready for it's final
journey!

{{image (src="/eagleeye_cleanroom.jpg" small=false title="The EagleEye satellite, soon to be launched!")}}

Bought myself a bike. Expłoring biking routes
around Warsaw.

>Watching:
>
>- Into the Wild (2005)
>- Invincible - Season 2, part 1

```
0X.05
```

Questioning my approach to functional programming, memory safe programming
languages, and "doing things the declarative way" with the thought-provoking
arguments provided by Mr Richard P. Gabriel.

>Reading:
>
>- [Richard P. Gabriel - Worse Is Better](https://www.dreamsongs.com/WorseIsBetter.html)
>- [Richard P. Gabriel - Models of Software Acceptance - How Winners Win](https://www.dreamsongs.com/Files/AcceptanceModels.pdf)
>
>Listening:
>
>- Ryan Lott - Pentaptych


```
3X.04
```

Made a [tiny](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/307221) contribution to
Nixpkgs without making myself look like a complete fool (which happened at the
previous try). Their [documentation for
contributors](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md) is
likely the best piece of software documentation I have ever read.

>Listening:
>
>- Snarky Puppy

{{image (src="/snarky.jpg" small=false title="Snarky Puppy and the absolutely top-tier frypan solo.")}}


```
2X.04
```

>Reading:
>
>- Eelco Dolstra - The Purely Functional Software Deployment Model


```
1X.04
```

{{image (src="/synthjaw.jpg" small=false title="Attended the [SynthJaw](https://synthjaw.pl/) jam session. Incredibly friendly synth people, recommended!")}}

>Reading:
>
>- Liu Cixin - The Dark Forest
>
>Watching:
>
>- The World's End (2013)
>- Poor Things (2023)
>
>Listening:
>
>- Peter Gabriel - Scratch My Back


```
0X.04
```


Converted my home NixOs infrastructure to [Nix
Flakes](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Flakes). Pinning the entire OS configuration to
a specific revision(s) of Nixpkgs and having it build/rollback without any
fears is a breath of fresh air :)


>Listening:
>
>- Sam Harris & Robert Sapolsky - We Really Don't Have Free Will?


```
2X.03
```

>Watching:
>
>- Dune: Part Two
>- The Holy Mountain (1973)
>
>
>Reading:
>
>- [NixOS in Production](https://github.com/Gabriella439/nixos-in-production)
>- Cixin Liu - Theee Body Problem
>
>Listening:
>
>- Lor

{{image (src="/lor.jpg" small=false title="The band Lor in Niebo, Warsaw")}}


```
1X.03
```

Finally having some time to play around with the
used Octatrack unit I bought a couple months ago. It
still surprises me how much hardware-centered music
making machines feel similar to terminal-based tools
such as bash/zsh/nu and vim.

Still fiddling with [NixOs](/nixos), making tiny steps towards
using it as a daily driver.

```
0X.03
```

>Watching:
>
>- Crumb (1994)
>
>Listening:
>
>- Ryuichi Sakamoto - Merry Christmas Mr. Lawrence
>- Jacob Collier - Djesse Vol. 4

A pleasant surprise: *Djesse Vol. 4 - Box Full Of Stars Pt. 2* contains a few
words in Polish at `2.15`


```
2X.02
```

Picked up an Arduino and started playing around with
Rust for AVRs.

>Watching:
>
>- Hayao Miyazaki - The Boy and the Heron
>- David Lynch - Dune
>
>Listening:
>
>- Son Lux - Prophecy
>- Daft Punk - Infinity Repeating


```
1X.02
```

TODO: add note on making myself look like an idiot when attempting to contribute to nixpkgs.

>Listening:
>
>- Daft Punk - Human After All
>- Alan Parsons Project - Ammonia Avenue


```
0X.02
```

>Listening:
>
>- Robert Sapolsky - Human Behavioral Biology
>
>Reading:
>
>- Peter Watts - Behemoth


```
2X.01
```

Done some optimisations of my infrastructure:

- All services are now accessible from IPv6
- Switched from TCP to UNIX sockets in the Postgres database used
  by [Invidious instance](https://invidious.baczek.me/)
- Fine-tuned Postgres with
  [PGTune](https://pgtune.leopard.in.ua/), hoping to see some
  results in my monitoring. Doing that configuration via
  [NixOs](/nixos) was a breeze

To my surprise, after 2 days I took a look at my monitoring
charts and saw visible improvements in my metrics:

- CPU usage is down **a lot**
- Almost 3 times less IO operations are performed
- CPU temperature is down **by 10℃**

..all of that while the request rate reported by Caddy hasn't
changed!

{{image (src="/metrics_pgtune.png" small=true title="Metrics from [Node Exporter](https://github.com/prometheus/node_exporter). Light-blue line marks the moment when PostgreSQL tunings were applied.")}}

---

Went back to my [Invidious MR adding Prometheus
metrics](https://github.com/iv-org/invidious/pull/3576).

>Listening:
>
>- Depeche Mode - Exciter
>
>Watching:
>
>- Ennio (2021)


```
1X.01
```

Broke my whole IT infrastructure for 12+ hours due to a trivial mistake in
static IP configuration. I haven't noticed it until late afternoon, the fix was
rather easy but I learned a bit about `nmcli`. Funny adventure, worth it :)

Week 1 of going to the gym!

Bought a used Octatrack unit. I already have to hold myself back from tinkering
with it instead of during house chores. Once I connect my piano to it I'm gonna
be out for at least a few days :) The workflow is wonderful and the idea of
having a single "macro knob" is both simple and effective.

>Reading:
>
>- Peter Watts - Maelstrom
>
>Listening:
>
>- Vulfpeck - Live at Madison Square Garden
>- David Bowie - Sound and Vision (the pure piano version)


```
0X.01
```

Finished migrating my cloud & home instrastructure to [NixOs](/nixos). It
really feels like an improvement over Ansible playbooks (although I am still
using them for copying files & running system rebuilds, it is the easiest
solution for me), as I can merge custom software builds/packaging with the system
setup & configuration. Learned a bit about [`nftables`](https://nftables.org)
in the process.

Trying out some funky rhytms - learning how to play Beastly by Vulfpeck. Amazed
to see that they've made [an official
tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KQRV0c1KXYc) on that song and some
others.


>Reading:
>
>- Peter Watts - Starfish
>
>Listening:
>
>- Nicolas Jaar - Space Is Only Noise If You Can See
>- Jungle - For Ever
>- Kenny G - Sade
>- Lovage et al. - Music to Make Love to Your Old Lady by

---

<br>

Go back to [2023](/2023).

<br>
